[DNM] Add calculated commit ts (#25)
tikv/rfcs: text/2019-03-19-calculated-commit-ts.md

# Calculated Commit TS

## Summary

> Support calculating `commit_ts`es instead of allocating them from PD to reduce

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes a feature of calculating `commit_ts` instead of allocating commit timestamps from PD to reduce
```

latency of committing.

## Motivation

TiKV uses Percolator's transaction algorithm. When committing a transaction,
there are a few steps to do:

1. Prewrite all keys with the transaction's `start_ts`
2. Allocate the `commit_ts` from PD.
3. Commit the transaction with `commit_ts`.

The `commit_ts` allocated from PD is important in providing Snapshot Isolation,
however allocating it from PD is not the only possible way. It's possible to
calculate it instead of allocating it for every transaction. Therefore, we can

> remove the latency of waiting for PD's response, as a result we can reduce

Reviewer: ```suggestion
remove the latency of waiting for PD's response, thereby reducing
```

> latency of committing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
commit latency.
```

## Detailed design

### How to calculate a valid `commit_ts`

To provide Snapshot Isolation, we should ensure all transactional reads are
repeatable. The `commit_ts` should be large enough so that the transaction will
not be committed before a valid read. Otherwise, Repeatable Read will be broken.
For example:

1. Txn1 gets `start_ts` 100
2. Txn2 gets `start_ts` 200

> 3. Txn2 reads key `"k1"` and got value `"1"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Txn2 reads key `"k1"` and gets value `"1"`
```

> 4. Txn1 prewrites on `"k1"` with value `"2"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Txn1 prewrites `"k1"` with value `"2"`
```

> 5. Txn1 committed with `commit_ts` 101

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Txn1 commits with `commit_ts` 101
```

```rust
struct RegionMaxTsRecord {
    /// The `max_read_ts` is not safe to use immediately after creation or
    /// updating of the region. When the `max_read_ts` is ready, `is_ready` will
    /// be set.
    is_ready: bool,

    /// The version of the region's epoch. The `max_read_ts` can only be used
    /// when `version` matches the prewrite request's version.
    version: u64,

    /// The maximum timestamp of transactional reads on this region. Note that
    /// in order to ensure the `max_read_ts` is no less than reads on the region
    /// before the region's leader goes to the current store, A timestamp will
    /// be fetched from PD after creating or updating of the region.
    max_read_ts: u64,
}
```

`ReadTsCache` contains a map that maps from `region_id` to `RegionMaxTsRecord`:

```rust
// Divide the map into multiple according to region_id's hash to reduce lock
// contention.
max_read_ts_map: Vec<RwLock<HashMap<u64, Arc<RwLock<RegionMaxTsRecord>>>>>,
```

Each transactional reads need to update the `max_read_ts` of the requested
region **before** getting snapshot (`u64::MAX` will be ignored). Each prewrite

> need to get the `max_read_ts` after successfully writing and return it with

Author: Emmmm, is the "it" standing for the `max_read_ts` unnecessary here?

`PrewriteResponse`, and the TiKV client is responsible for calculating the

> `commit_ts` according to the timestamps carried in `PrewriteResponse`s. If

Author: In 2PC prewrite phase, there can be multiple prewrite requests sent to multiple regions, therefore there will be multiple timestamps came from multiple prewrite responses....

> failed to get the `max_read_ts` (due to not ready or version not match), just

Author: It's not "prewrite" who gets the `max_read_ts`. It's TiKV client that gets `max_read_ts`s from prewrite responses.

returns 0 to tell the client to fall back to allocating `commit_ts` from PD.

`ReadTsCache` updates its inner region information via Raftstore observer and
collects only leader. Every time a region is added to the map or a region's

> version is changed, `is_ready` will be unset until getting a timestamp from PD.

Author: I meant "set the flag to false". And I thought the word "unset" is proper enough...

### New constraints to TiKV's txn algorithm

* If Txn1's `commit_ts` is the same as Txn2's `start_ts`, then Txn1's committed
  data is visible to Txn2
* If key `"k1"`'s latest version's `commit_ts` is the same as Txn1's `start_Ts`,
  then Txn1 prewrites on key `"k1"` will cause write conflict.
* In `CF_WRITE`, rollback record should never replace other records with the
  same key and timestamp.

### Code changes to TiKV Client

In the 2PC algorithm, if all prewrite requests returns a non-zero timestamp,
then the `commit_ts` can be calculated. Otherwise it should still request the
`commit_ts` from PD.

### Corner cases

Regions' leaders are not static. They may transfer from a TiKV to another TiKV.
Consider this case:

1. Txn1 get start_ts 50
2. Txn2 read `"k1"` with timestamp 200

> 3. Leader transfer (And another TiKV doesn't know the previous `max_read_ts`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Leader transfers to another TiKV that doesn't know the previous `max_read_ts`
```

   200)

> 4. Txn3 read `"k1"` with timestamp 100

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Txn3 reads `"k1"` with timestamp 100
```

> 5. Txn1 prewrite and commit on `"k1"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Txn1 prewrites and commits `"k1"`
```

> If we don't carefully handle this case, Txn1's `commit_ts` may be calculated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we don't handle this case carefully, Txn1's `commit_ts` may be calculated as
```

> 101, then if Txn2 reads again, it will get a different value, which means, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
101, then if Txn2 reads again, it will get a different value, which means,
```

Repeatable Read is broken.

> The similar problem also happens when merging occurs. If region1(`max_read_ts`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The similar problem may also happen for merging. If region1 (`max_read_ts`
```

> is 200) merges into region2(`max_read_ts` is 100), then it's difficult to know

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is 200) merges into region2 (`max_read_ts` is 100), it's difficult to know
```

> that region2's `max_read_ts` should be updated to 200, especially if the two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that whether  region2's `max_read_ts` should be updated to 200, especially when the leaders for the two
```

Author: I think both of these are ok:
* it's difficult to know that region2's `max_read_ts` should be updated to 200
* it's difficult to know that whether region2's `max_read_ts` should be updated
But it's strange to use both "whether" and "to 200"

> regions' leaders are on different TiKVs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
regions are on different TiKVs.
```

That's why the `is_ready` field is here. When a region is just created in
`ReadTsCache`, or a region's version is just changed, `is_ready` will be set to
false. At the same time a background thread will get a timestamp from PD, update

> the `max_read_ts` with it and set `is_ready` to true. This promises that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `max_read_ts` with it and set `is_ready` to true. This guarantees that
```

> `max_read_ts` is safe as far as `is_ready` is true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`max_read_ts` is safe as long as `is_ready` is true.
```

Another problem is that, now it's possible that a transaction's `commit_ts` is
the same as another transaction's `start_ts`. In the current implementation in
TiKV, a committed transaction will leave a commit record with key
`key{commit_ts}` in `CF_WRITE`, and a committed transaction will leave a
rollback record `key{start_ts}` in `CF_WRITE`. So there may be key collision
in `CF_WRITE`. The solution is, when writing Rollback record to `CF_WRITE`, if
there's already another record with the same key and timestamp, then the
Rollback will not be written; when a prewrite finds there's a record in
`CF_WRITE` with the same key and timestamp, the prewrite will fail.

## Drawbacks

> * Possibly performance regression to transactional reads caused by lock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Possible performance regression to transactional reads caused by lock
```

  contentions.

> * Makes the `commit_ts` not related to the real commit time, which may make the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Detaches `commit_ts` from the actual commit time, which may make the
```

  data lives shorter than GC lifetime.

> * Breaks historical readings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Breaks historical reads.
```

* Increases complexity of the code.
* tidb-binlog will be much affected by this change.

> * If a user reads TiKV with a timestamp that is ahead of the real time (this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If a user reads TiKV with a timestamp that is ahead of the actual time
```

>   might be done by calling TiKV client directly), it may cause a transaction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(probably caused by calling TiKV client directly),  a transaction might be
```

  committed with a `commit_ts` that is ahead of the real time.

> It's better to made this an optional optimization, and can be enabled with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's better to make this an optional optimization that can be enabled with
```

config when possible.

## Alternatives

## Unresolved questions

The performance impacts to reads with shuffle leader enabled still need to be

> carefully dealt with. When leader transfers, the outer lock of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
carefully dealt with. When a leader transfers, the outer lock of
```

> `max_read_ts_map` need to be write locked. Therefore, other read/write

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`max_read_ts_map` needs to be write locked. Therefore, other read/write
```

2. Allocate the `commit_ts` from PD.
3. Commit the transaction with `commit_ts`.

The `commit_ts` allocated from PD is important in providing Snapshot Isolation,
however allocating it from PD is not the only possible way. It's possible to
calculate it instead of allocating it for every transaction. Therefore, we can
remove the latency of waiting for PD's response, thereby reducing commit
latency.

## Detailed design

### How to calculate a valid `commit_ts`

To provide Snapshot Isolation, we should ensure all transactional reads are
repeatable. The `commit_ts` should be large enough so that the transaction will
not be committed before a valid read. Otherwise, Repeatable Read will be broken.
For example:

1. Txn1 gets `start_ts` 100
2. Txn2 gets `start_ts` 200
3. Txn2 reads key `"k1"` and gets value `"1"`
4. Txn1 prewrites `"k1"` with value `"2"`
5. Txn1 commits with `commit_ts` 101
6. Tnx2 reads key `"k1"` and gets value `"2"`

Txn2 reads `"k1"` twice but gets two different results. If `commit_ts` is
allocated from PD, this will not happen, because Txn2's first read must happen
before Txn1's prewrite, and Txn1's `commit_ts` must be requested after finishing

> prewrite, which means, Txn2's `commit_ts` must be larger than Txn1's `start_ts`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prewrite. This means Txn2's `commit_ts` must be larger than Txn1's `start_ts`.
```

Author: I want the both two parts around the "which means" be in the `because` clause. How is it if I change it to this:
> If `commit_ts` is allocated from PD, this will not happen, because Txn2's first read must happen before Txn1's prewrite while Txn1's `commit_ts` must be requested after finishing prewrite, and as a result Txn2's `commit_ts` must be larger than Txn1's `start_ts`.

Reviewer: The point is to avoid run-on sentences. Your re-writing is good. And we may want to split the sentence again as below:
> If commit_ts is allocated from PD, this will not happen, because Txn2's first read must happen before Txn1's prewrite while Txn1's commit_ts must be requested after finishing prewrite. And as a result, Txn2's commit_ts must be larger than Txn1's start_ts.

Author: Done

    /// before the region's leader goes to the current store, A timestamp will
    /// be fetched from PD after creating or updating of the region.
    max_read_ts: u64,
}
```

`ReadTsCache` contains mapping from `region_id` to `RegionMaxTsRecord`:

```rust
// Divide the map into multiple according to region_id's hash to reduce lock
// contention.
max_read_ts_map: Vec<RwLock<HashMap<u64, Arc<RwLock<RegionMaxTsRecord>>>>>,
```

Each transactional read needs to update the `max_read_ts` of the requested
region **before** getting snapshot (`u64::MAX` will be ignored). Each prewrite
needs to get the `max_read_ts` after writing successfully and return it with
`PrewriteResponse`, and the TiKV client is responsible for calculating the
`commit_ts` according to the timestamps carried in `PrewriteResponse`s. If TiKV
can't provide `max_read_ts` for a Region (due to not ready or version mismatch),
just returns 0 to tell the client to fall back to allocating `commit_ts` from
PD.

`ReadTsCache` updates its inner region information via Raftstore observer and
only collects leader information. Each time a region is added to the map or a

> region's version is changed, `is_ready` will be unset until getting a timestamp

Reviewer: "getting a timestamp" is not an act of `is_ready`, so we need to use the passive voice here
```suggestion
region's version is changed, `is_ready` will be unset until a timestamp is obtained
```

### Corner cases

Regions' leaders are not static. They may transfer from one TiKV instance to
another. Consider this case:

1. Txn1 gets `start_ts` 50
2. Txn2 reads `"k1"` with timestamp 200
3. Leader transfers to another TiKV that doesn't know the previous `max_read_ts`
   200
4. Txn3 reads `"k1"` with timestamp 100
5. Txn1 prewrites and commits `"k1"`

If we don't handle this case carefully, Txn1's `commit_ts` may be calculated as
101, then if Txn2 reads again, it will get a different value, which means,
Repeatable Read is broken.

The similar problem may also happen for merging. If region1 (`max_read_ts` is
200) merges into region2 (`max_read_ts` is 100), it's difficult to know that
region2's `max_read_ts` should be updated to 200, especially when the leaders
of the two regions are on different TiKVs.

That's why the `is_ready` field is here. When a region is just created in
`ReadTsCache`, or a region's version is just changed, `is_ready` will be set to
false. At the same time a background thread will get a timestamp from PD, update
the `max_read_ts` with it and set `is_ready` to true. This guarantees that
`max_read_ts` is safe as long as `is_ready` is true.

> Another problem is that, now it's possible that a transaction's `commit_ts` is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another problem is that a transaction's `commit_ts` might be 
```

the same as another transaction's `start_ts`. In the current implementation in
TiKV, a committed transaction will leave a commit record with key
`key{commit_ts}` in `CF_WRITE`, and a committed transaction will leave a

> rollback record `key{start_ts}` in `CF_WRITE`. So there may be key collision

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rollback record `key{start_ts}` in `CF_WRITE`. So there may be a key collision
```

Rollback will not be written; when a prewrite finds there's a record in
`CF_WRITE` with the same key and timestamp, the prewrite will fail.

## Drawbacks

* Possibly performance regression to transactional reads caused by lock
  contentions.
* Makes the `commit_ts` not related to the real commit time, which may make the
  data lives shorter than GC lifetime.
* Breaks historical snapshot reading.
* Increases complexity of the code.
* tidb-binlog will be much affected by this change.
* If a user reads TiKV with a timestamp that is ahead of the real time (this
  might be done by calling TiKV client directly), it may cause a transaction
  committed with a `commit_ts` that is ahead of the real time.

> * If someday we supports transactional reads on followers, it will be exclusive

Reviewer 2: Follower can send the read ts to leader when involve ReadIndex command.

# Calculated Commit TS

## Summary

This RFC proposes a feature of calculating `commit_ts` instead of allocating
`commit_ts` from PD to reduce latency of committing.

## Motivation

TiKV uses Percolator's transaction algorithm. When committing a transaction,

> there are a few steps to do:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there are a few steps to take:
```

1. Prewrite all keys with the transaction's `start_ts`
2. Allocate the `commit_ts` from PD.
3. Commit the transaction with `commit_ts`.

> The `commit_ts` allocated from PD is important in providing Snapshot Isolation,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `commit_ts` allocated from PD is important in providing Snapshot Isolation.
```

> however allocating it from PD is not the only possible way. It's possible to

Reviewer: When we use it to join two independent sentences, we need to use either use a period or semicolon for the first sentence. 
```suggestion
However, allocating it from PD is not the only possible way. It's possible to
```

calculate it instead of allocating it for every transaction. Therefore, we can
remove the latency of waiting for PD's response, thereby reducing commit
latency.

## Detailed design

### How to calculate a valid `commit_ts`

To provide Snapshot Isolation, we should ensure all transactional reads are
repeatable. The `commit_ts` should be large enough so that the transaction will
not be committed before a valid read. Otherwise, Repeatable Read will be broken.
For example:

1. Txn1 gets `start_ts` 100
2. Txn2 gets `start_ts` 200
3. Txn2 reads key `"k1"` and gets value `"1"`
4. Txn1 prewrites `"k1"` with value `"2"`
5. Txn1 commits with `commit_ts` 101
6. Tnx2 reads key `"k1"` and gets value `"2"`

Txn2 reads `"k1"` twice but gets two different results. If `commit_ts` is
allocated from PD, this will not happen, because Txn2's first read must happen
before Txn1's prewrite while Txn1's `commit_ts` must be requested after
finishing prewrite. And as a result, Txn2's `commit_ts` must be larger than
Txn1's `start_ts`.

On the other hand, `commit_ts` can't be arbitrarily large. If the `commit_ts` is

> ahead of actual time, the committed data may be unreadable by other new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ahead of the actual time, the committed data may be unreadable by other new
```

> transactions, which breaks the integrity. We are not sure whether a timestamp is

Reviewer: No "the" before this kind of words. (non-countable, abstract)
```suggestion
transactions, which breaks integrity. We are not sure whether a timestamp is
```

> ahead of the real time if we don't ask PD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ahead of the actual time if we don't ask PD.
```

To conclude, in order not to break the Snapshot Isolation and the integrity, a
valid range for `commit_ts` should be:

```text
max{start_ts, max_read_ts_of_written_keys} < commit_ts <= now
```

> So here comes an idea that we can calculate the commit_ts this way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So here comes an idea to calculate the commit_ts:
```

(and they share the same content). `ReadTsCache` records `max_read_ts` of all
leaders on this store. For each leader, these fields are saved:

```rust
struct RegionMaxTsRecord {
    /// The `max_read_ts` is not safe to use immediately after creation or
    /// updating of the region. When the `max_read_ts` is ready, `is_ready` will
    /// be set.
    is_ready: bool,

    /// The version of the region's epoch. The `max_read_ts` can only be used
    /// when `version` matches the prewrite request's version.
    version: u64,

    /// The maximum timestamp of transactional reads on this region. Note that
    /// in order to ensure the `max_read_ts` is no less than reads on the region
    /// before the region's leader goes to the current store, A timestamp will
    /// be fetched from PD after creating or updating of the region.
    max_read_ts: u64,
}
```

`ReadTsCache` contains mapping from `region_id` to `RegionMaxTsRecord`:

```rust
// Divide the map into multiple according to region_id's hash to reduce lock
// contention.
max_read_ts_map: Vec<RwLock<HashMap<u64, Arc<RwLock<RegionMaxTsRecord>>>>>,
```

Each transactional read needs to update the `max_read_ts` of the requested

> region **before** getting snapshot (`u64::MAX` will be ignored). Each prewrite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
region **before** getting a snapshot (`u64::MAX` will be ignored). Each prewrite
```

> region **before** getting snapshot (`u64::MAX` will be ignored). Each prewrite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
region **before** getting a snapshot (`u64::MAX` will be ignored). Each prewrite
```

> needs to get the `max_read_ts` after writing successfully and return it with

Reviewer: No "the" if we are not referring to a specific object. And yes we can use it in "return it with" to refer to `max_read_ts`
```suggestion
needs to get `max_read_ts` after writing successfully and return it with
```

`PrewriteResponse`, and the TiKV client is responsible for calculating the
`commit_ts` according to the timestamps carried in `PrewriteResponse`s. If TiKV

> can't provide `max_read_ts` for a Region (due to not ready or version mismatch),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can't provide `max_read_ts` for a Region (not ready or version mismatched),
```

> just returns 0 to tell the client to fall back to allocating `commit_ts` from

Reviewer: Not clear to me who returns 0. So I suggest using passive voice here.
```suggestion
0 is returned to tell the client to fall back to allocating `commit_ts` from
```

PD.

> `ReadTsCache` updates its inner region information via Raftstore observer and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ReadTsCache` updates its inner region information via the Raftstore observer and
```

> only collects leader information. Each time a region is added to the map or a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
only collects information of the leader. Each time a region is added to the map or a
```

region's version is changed, `is_ready` will be unset until getting a timestamp
from PD.

### New constraints to TiKV's txn algorithm

* If Txn1's `commit_ts` is the same as Txn2's `start_ts`, then Txn1's committed

>   data is visible to Txn2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  data is visible to Txn2.
```

* If `commit_ts` of key `"k1"`'s latest version is the same as Txn1's

>   `start_Ts`, then Txn1's prewrites on key `"k1"` will cause a write conflict.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `start_Ts`, then Txn1's prewrites on `"k1"` will cause a write conflict.
```

* In `CF_WRITE`, a rollback record should never replace other records with the
  same key and timestamp.

### Code changes to TiKV Client

In the 2PC algorithm, if all prewrite requests return a non-zero timestamp,

> then `commit_ts` can be calculated. Otherwise, it still needs to request the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then `commit_ts` can be calculated. Otherwise, it still needs to request a
```

> then `commit_ts` can be calculated. Otherwise, it still needs to request the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then `commit_ts` can be calculated. Otherwise, it still needs to request a
```

`commit_ts` from PD.

### Corner cases

Regions' leaders are not static. They may transfer from one TiKV instance to
another. Consider this case:

1. Txn1 gets `start_ts` 50
2. Txn2 reads `"k1"` with timestamp 200
3. Leader transfers to another TiKV that doesn't know the previous `max_read_ts`
   200
4. Txn3 reads `"k1"` with timestamp 100
5. Txn1 prewrites and commits `"k1"`

If we don't handle this case carefully, Txn1's `commit_ts` may be calculated as

> 101, then if Txn2 reads again, it will get a different value, which means,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
101.  If Txn2 reads again, it will get a different value, which means that
```

Repeatable Read is broken.

The similar problem may also happen for merging. If region1 (`max_read_ts` is
200) merges into region2 (`max_read_ts` is 100), it's difficult to know that
region2's `max_read_ts` should be updated to 200, especially when the leaders
of the two regions are on different TiKVs.

That's why the `is_ready` field is here. When a region is just created in
`ReadTsCache`, or a region's version is just changed, `is_ready` will be set to
false. At the same time a background thread will get a timestamp from PD, update

> the `max_read_ts` with it and set `is_ready` to true. This guarantees that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `max_read_ts` with it, and set `is_ready` to true. This guarantees that
```

TiKV, a committed transaction will leave a commit record with key
`key{commit_ts}` in `CF_WRITE`, and a committed transaction will leave a
rollback record `key{start_ts}` in `CF_WRITE`. So there may be key collision
in `CF_WRITE`. The solution is, when writing Rollback record to `CF_WRITE`, if
there's already another record with the same key and timestamp, then the
Rollback will not be written; when a prewrite finds there's a record in
`CF_WRITE` with the same key and timestamp, the prewrite will fail.

## Drawbacks

* Possible performance regression to transactional reads caused by lock
  contentions.
* Detaches `commit_ts` from the actual commit time, which may make the data
  lives shorter than GC lifetime.
* Breaks historical reads.
* Increases complexity of the code.
* tidb-binlog will be much affected by this change.
* If a user reads TiKV with a timestamp that is ahead of actual time (probably
  caused by calling TiKV client directly), a transaction might be committed with
  a `commit_ts` that is ahead of the real time.

It's better to make this an optional optimization that can be enabled with
config when it's needed.

## Alternatives

## Unresolved questions

> The performance impacts to reads with shuffle leader enabled still needs to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The performance impacts on reads with shuffle leader enabled still need to be
```

carefully dealt with. When a leader transfers, the outer lock of
`max_read_ts_map` need to be write locked. Therefore, other read/write
operations, which only need read lock, may be affected. According to tests, this

> may make QPS of read only queries 3% lower (the tested queries are like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
may make QPS of read-only queries 3% lower (the tested queries are like
```
